.. _linux_install:

=============
Linux installation
=============

We outline the steps for installing *MRtrix3* on a Linux machine. Please consult 
:ref:`linux_trouble_shooting` if you encounter any issues with the configure, build
or runtime operations of *MRtrix3*.

Check requirements
------------------

To install *MRtrix3*, you will need the following:

-  a `C++11 <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/C%2B%2B11>`__ compliant
   compiler (GCC version >= 4.8, clang)
-  `Python <https://www.python.org/>`__ version >= 2.6
-  The `zlib <http://www.zlib.net/>`__ compression library
-  `Eigen <http://eigen.tuxfamily.org>`__ version 3
-  `Qt <http://www.qt.io/>`__ version >= 4.7 *[GUI components only]*

.. WARNING:: 
    To run the GUI components of *MRtrix3* (``mrview`` &
    ``shview``), you will also need:

    -  an `OpenGL <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/OpenGL>`__ 3.3 compliant graphics card and corresponding software driver

    Note that this implies you *cannot run the GUI components over a remote
    X11 connection*, since it can't support OpenGL 3.3+ rendering - see
    :ref:`remote_display` for details.

Install Dependencies
--------------------

The installation procedure will depend on your system. Package names may
changes between distributions, and between different releases of the
same distribution. The commands below are suggestions based on what has
been reported to work in the past, but may need to be amended. See below
for hints on how to proceed in this case.

-  Ubuntu Linux (and derivatives, e.g. Linux Mint):

   ::

       sudo apt-get install git g++ python libeigen3-dev zlib1g-dev libqt4-opengl-dev libgl1-mesa-dev

-  RPM-based distros (Fedora, CentOS):

   ::

       sudo yum install git g++ python eigen3-devel zlib-devel libqt4-devel libgl1-mesa-dev

-  Arch Linux:

   ::

       sudo pacman -Syu git python gcc zlib eigen qt5-svg

If this doesn't work
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

You may find that your package installer is unable to find the packages
listed, or that the subsequent steps fail due to missing dependencies
(particularly the ``./configure`` command). In this case, you will need
to search the package database and find the correct names for these
packages:

-  git

-  your compiler (gcc 4.8 or above, or clang)

-  Python version >2.6

-  the zlib compression library and its corresponding development
   header/include files

-  the Eigen template library (only consists of development header/include files)

-  Qt version >4.7, its corresponding development header/include files,
   and the executables required to compile the code. Note this will most
   likely be broken up into several packages, depending on how your
   distribution has chosen to distribute this. You will need to get
   those that provide these Qt modules: Core, GUI, OpenGL, SVG, and the
   qmake, rcc & moc executables (note these will probably be included in
   one of the other packages).

.. WARNING::  
    The compiler included in Ubuntu 12.04 and other older distributions is no longer capable of compiling *MRtrix3*, as it now
    requires C++11 support. The solution is to use a newer compiler as provided by the `Ubuntu toolchain 
    PPA <https://launchpad.net/~ubuntu-toolchain-r/+archive/ubuntu/test>`__ - follow the link for instructions on how to add the PPA. Once the PPA
    has been added, you'll need to issue a ``sudo apt-get update``, followed
    by ``sudo apt-get install g++-4.9``. You will probably also need to tell
    ``./configure`` to use this compiler (see ``./configure -help`` for
    further options):

    ::

        CXX=g++-4.9 LD=g++-4.9 ./configure

If this *really* doesn't work
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If for whatever reasons you need to install *MRtrix3* on a system with
older dependencies, and you are unable to update the software (e.g. you
want to run *MRtrix3* on a centrally-managed HPC cluster), you can as a
last resort use the procedure described in :ref:`linux_standalone`.

Git setup
---------

Set up your git environment as per the `Git instructions
page <https://help.github.com/articles/set-up-git/#setting-up-git>`__

.. _linux_build:

Build *MRtrix3*
-------------

1. Clone the *MRtrix3* repository:

   ::

       git clone https://github.com/MRtrix3/mrtrix3.git

   or if you have set up your SSH keys (for collaborators):

   ::

       git clone git@github.com:MRtrix3/mrtrix3.git

2. Configure the MRtrix install:

   ::

       cd mrtrix3
       ./configure

   If this does not work, examine the 'configure.log' file that is
   generated by this step, it may give clues as to what went wrong.

3. Build the binaries:

   ::

       ./build

Set up *MRtrix3*
--------------

1. Set your PATH in the shell startup file (amend if you use tcsh or
   some other shell):

   ::

       echo PATH=$(pwd)/release/bin:$(pwd)/scripts:\$PATH >> ~/.bashrc

2. Close the terminal and start another one to ensure the startup file
   is read (or just type 'bash')

3. Type ``mrview`` to check that everything works

4. You may also want to have a look through the :ref:`mrtrix_config_options` and set anything you think
   might be required on your system.

Keeping *MRtrix3* up to date
--------------------------

1. You can update your installation at any time by opening a terminal in
   the MRtrix3 folder, and typing:

   ::

       git pull
       ./build

2. If this doesn't work immediately, it may be that you need to re-run
   the configure script:

   ::

       ./configure

   and re-run step 1 again.


.. _linux_standalone:

Standalone installation on Linux
-------------------------------------

In some cases, users need to install *MRtrix3* on systems running older
distributions, over which they have little or no control, for example
centrally-managed HPC clusters. In such cases, there genuinely is no way
to install the dependencies required to compile and run *MRtrix3*. There
are two ways to address this problem: `static
executables <#static-build>`__, and the `standalone
packager <#standalone-packager>`__. With both approaches, you can
compile *MRtrix3* on a modern distro (within a virtual machine for
example), package it up, and install it on any Linux system without
worrying about dependencies.

Important: setting the CPU architecture
^^^^^^

By default, ``configure`` will cause the build script to generate code
suitable to run on your current CPU (using the ``-march=native``
option). This means the executables will likely *not run* on a different
CPUs with different instruction sets, resulting in 'illegal instruction'
runtime errors. If you intend to run *MRtrix3* on a variety of different
systems with a range of CPUs, or you have no idea what the CPU is on
your target system, it is safest to specify a generic architecture when
configuring *MRtrix3*, before invoking ``./build``. For example, assuming
a 64-bit build is needed:

::

    ARCH='x86-64' ./configure
    ./build

For a 32-bit build, substituting ARCH='i686' or similar should suffice.

Static build
^^^^^

The simplest approach to this problem is to build so-called `static
executables <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Static_library>`__, which have
no run-time dependencies. This can be accomplished by generating a
static configuration before building the software, as follows.

First, obtain the code and extract or clone it on a modern distribution
(Arch, Ubuntu 14.04, Mint 17, ..., potentially with a virtual machine if
required). Then, from the main *MRtrix3* folder:

.. code::

    ./build clean
    git pull
    ARCH=x86-64 ./configure -static [-nogui]
    ./build

Note that this requires the availability of static versions of the
required libraries. This is generally not a problem, most distributions
will provide those by default, with the exception of Qt. If you require
a static build of MRView, you will most likely need to build a `static
version of
Qt <http://doc.qt.io/qt-5/linux-deployment.html#building-qt-statically>`__
beforehand. Use the ``-nogui`` option to skip installation of GUI
components, which rely on Qt.

You can then copy the contents of the ``release/bin/`` folder onto target
systems, make sure their location is listed in the ``PATH``, and start
using these commands.

Standalone packager
^^^^^^^^^^^

In the rare cases where the `static build <#Static-build>`__ procedure
above doesn't work for you, *MRtrix3* now includes the ``package_mrtrix``
script, which is designed to package an existing and fully-functional
installation from one system, so that it can be installed as a
self-contained standalone package on another system. What this means is
that you can now compile *MRtrix3* on a modern distro (within a virtual
machine for example), package it up, and install it on any Linux system
without worrying about dependencies.

**Note:** this is *not* the recommended way to install *MRtrix3*, and may
not work for your system. This is provided on a best-effort basis, as a
convenience for users who genuinely have no alternative.

What it does
"""""

The ``package_mrtrix`` script is included in the top-level folder of the
*MRtrix3* package (if you don't have it, use ``git pull`` to update). In
essence, all it does is collate all the dynamic libraries necessary for
runtime operation into a single folder, which you can then copy over and
extract onto target systems. For a truly standalone installation, you
need to add the ``-standalone`` option, which will also include any
system libraries required for runtime operation from your current
system, making them available on any target system.

Limitations
"""""

-  **OpenGL support:** this approach cannot magically make your system
   run MRView if it doesn't already support OpenGL 3.3 and above. This
   is a hardware driver issue, and can only be addressed by upgrading
   the drivers for your system - something that may or may not be
   possible.

-  **GUI support:** while this approach collates all the X11 libraries
   that are needed to launch the program, it is likely that these will
   then dynamically attempt to load further libraries that reside on
   your system. Unfortunately, this can introduce binary compatibility
   issues, and cause the GUI components to abort. This might happen even
   if your system does have OpenGL 3.3 support. There is unfortunately
   no simple solution to this.

-  **Installation on remote systems:** bear in mind that running the GUI
   components over a remote X11 connection is not possible, since the
   GLX protocol does not support OpenGL 3 and above. You may be able to
   use an OpenGL-capable VNC connection, but if that is not possible,
   there is little point in installing the GUI components on the remote
   server. The recommendation would be to configure with the ``-nogui``
   option to skip the GUI components. You should also be able to access
   your data over the network (e.g. using SAMBA or SSHFS), in which case
   you would be able to display the images by running MRView locally and
   loading the images over the shared network drives.

Instructions
"""""

First, obtain the code and extract or clone it on a modern distribution
(Arch, Ubuntu 14.04, Mint 17, ..., potentially with a virtual machine if
required). Then, from the main ``mrtrix3`` folder:

::

    ./build clean
    git pull
    ARCH='x86-64' ./configure [-nogui]
    ./build
    ./package_mrtrix -standalone

Then copy the resulting ``_package/mrtrix3`` folder to the desired
location on the target system (maybe your own home folder). To make the
*MRtrix3* command available on the command-line, the ``bin/`` folder needs
to be added to your PATH (note this assumes that you're running the BASH
shell):

::

    export PATH=$(pwd)/mrtrix3/release/bin:$(pwd)/mrtrix3/scripts:$PATH

The above will only set your PATH for the current session. To make this
the default for new sessions, you should add the relevant line to your
``~/.bashrc`` file:

::

    echo export PATH=$(pwd)/mrtrix3/release/bin:$(pwd)/mrtrix3/scripts:\$PATH >> ~/.bashrc


.. _linux_trouble_shooting:

Troubleshooting
-----

Below is a list of problems that you may encounter during installation
or running of *MRtrix3*, along with suggested solutions.

OpenGL version 3.3 not supported
^^^^^

This will typically lead to MRView crashing with a message such as:

::

    mrview: [ERROR] GLSL log [vertex shader]: ERROR: version '330' is not supported

There are three main reasons for this:

1. **Attempting to run MRView using X11 forwarding.** This will not work
   without some effort, see :ref:`remote_display` for details.

2. **Your installation genuinely does not support OpenGL 3.3.** In this
   case, the solution will involve figuring out:

   -  whether your graphics hardware can support OpenGL 3.3 at all;
   -  whether your Linux distribution provides any drivers for your
      graphics hardware that can support OpenGL 3.3;
   -  if not, whether the manufacturer of your graphics hardware
      provides drivers for Linux that can be installed on your
      distribution;
   -  how to install these drivers - a process that is invariably
      distribution-specific, and beyond the scope of this document. If
      you're having serious issues with this, you should consider asking
      on the `MRtrix3 community forum <http://community.mrtrix.org/>`__,
      you will often find others have come across similar issues and can
      provide useful advice. If you do, make sure you provide as much
      information as you can (at the very least, your exact
      distribution, including which version of it, the exact model of
      your graphics hardware, and what you've tried so far).

3. **Your installation does support OpenGL 3.3, but only provides access
   to the 3.3 functionality through the core profile, not through the
   compatibility profile.** This seems to be an issue particularly on
   more recent versions of Ubuntu 14.04. To see whether this is the
   problem, you only need to add the line:

   ::

       NeedOpenGLCoreProfile: 1

   to your MRtrix configuration file (typically, ``~/.mrtrix.conf``). If
   it doesn't work, you're probably stuck with reason 2.



